Weakness of cyber law in bangladesh

The offences of the Bangladesh Information & Communication Technology Act 2006 are non-cognigible in nature under section 76(2). The victim has to file an allegation to the law enforcing agencies to get remedy. This is the main weakness of the said act. In the time of enactment of the said act it was said in section 68 that a special tribunal named Cyber Tribunal will be established in every district of Bangladesh. But till now only a tribunal has established in Dhaka City.

Because of the dependency of technology specialist and well trained lawyer and judges the disposal of Cyber cases are rare. To remove such kind of pendency of cases judges, lawyer and specialist should be well trained.

The Bangladesh police have a special branch named “Anti-cyber Crime Department” headed by the Deputy Commissioner of Police to protect e-mail fraud, treat by e-mail, defamation or publishing of unauthorized pictures. But the department is yet to fulfill the public demand due to the scarcity of well trained man power. A case cannot be started due to the non visibility of the plaintiff. There is no scope for the state to take liabilities as being a plaintiff.

The Cyber Tribunal has not yet reward any punishment to any criminal. Due to this the criminals are insisting to occur crimes thinking that they will not be punished. This is one of the main weaknesses of the implementation of the Bangladesh Information & Communication Technology Act 2006.

There are a lot of systems to protect and trace the cyber criminals worldwide. Among them Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT7) is the most efficient method. It consists of the cyber specialists all over the world. The function of CERT is to monitor the computer network of the world. When any interruption, irregularities or any kind of unlawful activities occurred CERT can know about it. Knowing about it necessary steps are taken to protect or prevent the crime. By this no occurrence of network is unknown to CERT. Bangladesh has formed the authority of CERT by taking permission from the international CERT. But the government is yet to permit this for this it is working only for the necessity of international CERT. But not for the necessity of Bangladesh. According to the specialist of Bangladesh if the government permits the authorization of CERT of Bangladesh every occurrence will be traced by the law enforcing agencies. In these cases the crimes may be traced at the initial stage and then legal enforcement may be taken easily. On the other hand taking initiatives in accordance with the law may become easier in the case of taking contingence and filing any case. As cyber crimes can be traced technically by the specialist of Bangladesh and necessary knowledge can be ensured by the Bangladeshi for this a specialists team of CERT. can be formed for the greater benefit of the people of Bangladesh.